Rework the java exporters page (#3558)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/instrumentation/java/exporters.md

application.

{{% /alert %}}

To try out and verify your OTLP exporters, you can run the collector in a docker
container that writes telemetry directly to the console.

In an empty directory, create a file called `collector-config.yaml` with the
following content:

```yaml
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
      http:
exporters:
  debug:
    verbosity: detailed
service:
  pipelines:
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [debug]
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [debug]
    logs:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters: [debug]
```

Now run the collector in a docker container:

```shell
docker run -p 4317:4317 -p 4318:4318 --rm -v $(pwd)/collector-config.yaml:/etc/otelcol/config.yaml otel/opentelemetry-collector
```

This collector is now able to accept telemetry via OTLP. Later you may want to
[configure the collector](/docs/collector/configuration) to send your telemetry
to your observability backend.

### Dependencies {#otlp-dependencies}

If you want to send telemetry data to an OTLP endpoint (like the
[OpenTelemetry Collector](#collector-setup), [Jaeger](#jaeger) or

> [Prometheus](#prometheus)), there are multiple OTLP options available, each

Reviewer: Prometheus is a reference in here because it added experimental support for OTLP ingest, right?

Author: We have Prometheus across most other languages as well (had them for a while, not only by me introducing them via these PRs). I think it's more around them being CNCF as well/being a standard metrics endpoint for many

}
```

## Console

To debug your instrumentation or see the values locally in development, you can
use exporters writing telemetry data to the console (stdout).

If you followed the
[Getting Started](/docs/instrumentation/java/getting-started/) or
[Manual Instrumentation](/docs/instrumentation/java/manual/) guides, you already
have the console exporter installed.

The `LoggingSpanExporter`, the `LoggingMetricExporter` and the
`SystemOutLogRecordExporter` are included in the

> `opentelemetry-exporter-logging` artifact.

Reviewer: Might be good to mirror the comment above about how to specify the logging exporter when using autoconfigure:

> Note, that in the case of exporting via OTLP you do not need to set
`OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER`, `OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER` and `OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER` since
`otlp` is their default value

The value which selects the logging exports is `logging`, or `logging-otlp` for a version which logs the OTLP json encoding of the data (though `logging-otlp` requires the `opentelemetry-exporter-logging-otlp` artifact).

Author: ~~~suggestion
`opentelemetry-exporter-logging` artifact.

If you use
[SDK auto-configuration](/docs/instrumentation/java/manual/#automatic-configuration)
all you need to do is update your environment variables:
```shell
env OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=logging OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER=logging OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=logging  java -jar ./build/libs/java-simple.jar
```
~~~

Like this? The `logging-otlp` is an interesting corner case, I am wondering if it should live here OR be better used in the OTLP section since it is helpful there for debugging?

Reviewer: 👍

> The logging-otlp is an interesting corner case, I am wondering if it should live here OR be better used in the OTLP section since it is helpful there for debugging?

Yeah probably worth omitting logging-otlp for now.

## Jaeger

[Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) natively supports OTLP to receive trace
data. You can run Jaeger in a docker container with the UI accessible on port
16686 and OTLP enabled on ports 4137 and 4138:

```shell
docker run --rm \
  -e COLLECTOR_ZIPKIN_HOST_PORT=:9411 \
  -p 16686:16686 \
  -p 4317:4317 \
  -p 4318:4318 \
  -p 9411:9411 \
  jaegertracing/all-in-one:latest
```

Now following the instruction to setup the [OTLP exporters](#otlp-dependencies).

## Prometheus

To send your metric data to [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), you can either
[enable Prometheus' OTLP Receiver](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#otlp-receiver)

> and use the [OTLP exporter](#otlp) or you can use the `PrometheusExporter`.

Reviewer: The camel case of "PrometheusExporter" suggests its the name of a class in java. We call it the "prometheus exporter", but the class name is `PrometheusHttpServer`. Not sure how you want to reflect that in this document.

Author: ```suggestion
and use the [OTLP exporter](#otlp) or you can use the [`PrometheusHttpServer`](https://javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-exporter-prometheus/latest/io/opentelemetry/exporter/prometheus/PrometheusHttpServer.html), a `MetricReader`, that starts an HTTP server that will collect metrics and serialize to Prometheus text format on request.
```

Is it OK to just replace it like this? I used the wording from the API docs.

Reviewer: Sorry for the delay. Yeah that looks good.

You can run [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/) on ina Docker container by executing
the following command:

```shell
docker run --rm -d -p 9411:9411 --name zipkin openzipkin/zipkin
```

### Dependencies {#zipkin-dependencies}

To send your trace data to [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/), you can use the
`ZipkinSpanExporter`.

Install the
[`opentelemetry-exporter-zipkin`](https://javadoc.io/doc/io.opentelemetry/opentelemetry-exporter-zipkin/latest)
artifact as a dependency for your application:

{{< tabpane text=true >}} {{% tab Gradle %}}

```kotlin
dependencies {
    implementation 'io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporter-zipkin:{{% param vers.otel %}}-alpha'
}
```

{{% /tab %}} {{% tab Maven %}}

```xml
<project>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.opentelemetry</groupId>
            <artifactId>opentelemetry-exporter-zipkin</artifactId>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</project>
```

{{< /tab >}} {{< /tabpane>}}

Update your OpenTelemetry configuration to use the exporter and to send data to
your Zipkin backend:

```java
import io.opentelemetry.exporter.zipkin.ZipkinSpanExporter;

SdkTracerProvider sdkTracerProvider = SdkTracerProvider.builder()

>         .addSpanProcessor(BatchSpanProcessor.builder(OZipkinSpanExporter.builder().setEndpoint("http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans").build()).build())

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        .addSpanProcessor(BatchSpanProcessor.builder(ZipkinSpanExporter.builder().setEndpoint("http://localhost:9411/api/v2/spans").build()).build())
```
